All.
NOTE CONF
Right, let's let's start.
Please sit down.
NOTE CONF
So I've been asked to again remind you of this
event that's happening today.
NOTE CONF
Tomorrow Thursday careers event with employers coming to, um, meet
students, uh, with um, it's in McEwan's Hall, McEwan Hall,
NOTE CONF
which is in George Square.
And, um, uh, opportunities include things like, uh, internships, um,
NOTE CONF
uh, which are also available sometimes for students in the
summer of their first year.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So might be of interest.
NOTE CONF
Um, or if you want to see who might be
wanting to employ you in four years when you're finished.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um So for today, we have, uh, this music here.
NOTE CONF
This is, um.
Sorry, I wanted to explain this.
NOTE CONF
This is, um, uh, an eight year old singing, uh,
the Queen of the night aria from Magic Flute, which
NOTE CONF
is a famous, uh, piece of music.
Very difficult to sing.
NOTE CONF
And, um, and it's funny to watch her as she
does this.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I'll just play.
This for a couple of minutes.
NOTE CONF
It was a powerful thought for the end of the
film.
NOTE CONF
Which is firstly.
So that although these truths are the reference for her
NOTE CONF
father to have a new birth mother with the problem
of.
NOTE CONF
000.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
000000.
To die for me.
NOTE CONF
All right.
So that's the queen of the night.
NOTE CONF
So the queen of the night is, uh, is singing
this song to her daughter to say, you better do
NOTE CONF
what I say or else.
Um, so, uh, that's with all the correct facial expressions
NOTE CONF
and so forth.
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
But what you really want to know about is select,
take and drop, which is what this lecture is about.
NOTE CONF
So these are three functions that are built into Haskell.
And again I'm showing you the code for these to
NOTE CONF
to show you some other patterns of recursive functions okay.
Um so this is a sequence of three, the third
NOTE CONF
in a sequence of three lectures about recursion.
Um, because recursion is such an important topic, you need
NOTE CONF
to see lots of examples.
Next tutorial exercise, the one for next week, due to
NOTE CONF
do today in a week is going to be a
bunch of, um, exercises with recursion, so you'll get lots
NOTE CONF
of practice.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And apart from being, um, interesting examples of recursive function
definitions, these are also things that are useful, um, in
NOTE CONF
your daily life in Haskell programming.
So first, uh, what what these are for.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so, um, this first one, uh, I'm calling it
select, but it's written with two exclamation marks as an
NOTE CONF
infix function.
So this selects, um, a particular position within a list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, it's um, uh, okay.
NOTE CONF
You give it a list like this.
String words.
NOTE CONF
This is remember, a string is a list of characters.
Seems not to have, uh, you know, penetrated everybody's brains,
NOTE CONF
uh, so far.
But anyway, that's what it is.
NOTE CONF
It's a list is a sequence of a string of.
Sorry, a string is a list of characters.
NOTE CONF
And, uh, so this is five characters W, o, R,
D and s, and the third one in this, uh,
NOTE CONF
in this list, starting with zero W is position zero,
zero is position one, ah is position two and D
NOTE CONF
is position three.
So if you ask for the thing in position three,
NOTE CONF
you get a d the letter D the character D.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That is select.
And now those of you who are used to writing
NOTE CONF
programs in in C or Java or something like this
will say, great.
NOTE CONF
Finally, I've discovered the most important function in Haskell because
you will be used to writing programs that have things
NOTE CONF
like, uh.
Uh, I don't know, you know, whatever it is this
NOTE CONF
is this is kind of array indexing, at least in
some languages.
NOTE CONF
Okay, uh, you've got an array.
You want to find out what's in position number n,
NOTE CONF
and that's how you do it.
You you, uh, you address it that way.
NOTE CONF
Array indexing.
So this is kind of like array indexing, except it's
NOTE CONF
indexing into lists.
And you will think, great, I know this now.
NOTE CONF
It's so important.
I'm going to be using this all the time, okay?
NOTE CONF
Because that's what I do when I write programs in
Java or C.
NOTE CONF
Um, but you would be wrong because in, in, in,
in Haskell and functional programming, this is a, this is
NOTE CONF
a function that's available.
But, um, you know, instead of writing that you write
NOTE CONF
this.
It's available.
NOTE CONF
You can use it.
Sometimes it's handy, but it's actually very rarely used in
NOTE CONF
the sense that if you find yourself using it, probably
there's a better way to do whatever it is that
NOTE CONF
you wanted to do.
Okay, so but anyway, it's one of the things I
NOTE CONF
want to tell you about in this lecture.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, next one, the the function take.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Take.
You give it a number and you give it a
NOTE CONF
list, and it gives you, uh, the first of that
many, um, items from the list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
so take three of words it gives you.
NOTE CONF
The first three letters were okay take and drop.
Drop gives you everything after the first however many it
NOTE CONF
is items.
So these are shown here working on strings.
NOTE CONF
But strings are just an example of lists.
So it will work just as well on lists of
NOTE CONF
any kind.
Okay so those are the three functions I want to
NOTE CONF
talk about in today's lecture.
Um, they're handy, but um, mainly I wanted to show
NOTE CONF
you examples of recursive function definitions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Got it so far.
So remember those three functions.
NOTE CONF
What they do okay.
Because they're going to keep coming up throughout the lecture.
NOTE CONF
So take and drop and select.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So um I'm frequently going to be showing you.
uh, different ways of defining the same function.
NOTE CONF
So here are, here are the, um, a way to
define these three functions, uh, using comprehensions, list comprehensions.
NOTE CONF
And in a minute I'm going to show you how
to define these three function using recursion.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But first comprehensions because we learned that a few weeks
NOTE CONF
ago or well, like last week I guess, um, and
these definitions.
NOTE CONF
So this is select take and drop.
And I'm using this name uh select comp and take
NOTE CONF
comp and drop comp.
Uh, not because I need to use the word comp
NOTE CONF
in a definition using comprehensions, but just because I'm about
to define, uh, select and take and drop and I
NOTE CONF
want to avoid, um, you know, name clashes.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So all three of these are using, um, a kind
of programming idiom that I mentioned in the last lecture,
NOTE CONF
which is unzipping, you say no.
I used to be able to highlight that.
NOTE CONF
This seems to have taken that away from these displays.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So so this thing here, zip the list from, you
know, of numbers starting from zero going off forever and
NOTE CONF
and a list.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
We've got it.
We've got it here.
NOTE CONF
We've got it here and we've got it here.
And as I explained last time, what you get from
NOTE CONF
this is a list of pairs.
So here are the pairs okay.
NOTE CONF
And the first item in the pair is a position.
And the second item is the thing that's in that
NOTE CONF
position okay.
You're um, you know, if you start counting from zero
NOTE CONF
and, you know, zero, one, two, three, four, five, the
thing in this position, zero is going to be, um,
NOTE CONF
it's going to result in a pair of the form
zero comma, whatever it is.
NOTE CONF
Okay, next one pair, one comma, whatever is in that
position and so forth.
NOTE CONF
So this is going to give you a list of
uh, of, of positions paired with the thing that's in
NOTE CONF
that position.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that happens here.
It happens here and it happens here.
NOTE CONF
And then what we do with that is uh, is
gives us the result of these functions.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So if we've got a list of pairs of positions
NOTE CONF
and things in that position and we want to find
the ith thing.
NOTE CONF
So all we need to do is pick the one
where the position is I.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we're looking through the list that's formed here.
NOTE CONF
And we want the one okay is select X is
I okay.
NOTE CONF
So we want the thing in the ith position.
So we look for the case where j the position
NOTE CONF
we get here is equal to I.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that selects that gives us a list of all
the things in position I.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
There's only going to be one or actually at most
NOTE CONF
one okay.
Because I might be minus one or something.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um okay.
NOTE CONF
At most one.
And uh and so it's going to be a list
NOTE CONF
containing one thing, let's say usually one thing.
And so we need to actually extract that thing, whatever
NOTE CONF
it is from the list okay.
And so I'm going to define a helper function called
NOTE CONF
the the takes the list and gives you the only
thing in the list okay.
NOTE CONF
It's the thing in the list.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So um, uh, so that's what this does okay.
It gives you the unique thing which is in position
NOTE CONF
I.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Is that clear?
Anybody have a problem with that?
NOTE CONF
No.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, take and drop are, uh, similar, except that the
the guard here at the end is different.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so this is looking in the thing, looking for
the thing that's in position I.
NOTE CONF
And this is looking for all the things that are
in position, uh, less than I this is for take.
NOTE CONF
And this is all the things that are in position,
um, greater than or equal to I.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Remembering we're indexing from zero.
NOTE CONF
So, um, take comp apply to three and list will
give you the first three things.
NOTE CONF
That is the ones in position zero one and two.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And drop will give you all the things after that.
So positions uh 3456 etc..
NOTE CONF
All right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
You understand those.
So it's using this trick or this this this idea
NOTE CONF
that you use zip to pair positions with things in
that position.
NOTE CONF
So just showing you how that works.
Um, for, for the function take.
NOTE CONF
Um, just I don't think I want to go through
this in detail, but you can kind of do the
NOTE CONF
computation sequence where you take, for example, the the list
of characters words here.
NOTE CONF
Here is the list of pairs of positions of, you
know, position zero, one, two, three, etc. for those for
NOTE CONF
the for that list, we've got list of pairs here.
We're looking for the the ones where J is less
NOTE CONF
than three which are the first the first three of
those pairs.
NOTE CONF
And we're picking out uh x sorry, I should have
said that before.
NOTE CONF
We're picking out X for the positions that are less
than I hear.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So.
NOTE CONF
So we pick out w we pick out um oh.
And we pick out R but not D and S
NOTE CONF
because the guard is not true for those for those
two cases.
NOTE CONF
So this war and that's the answer.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
These computation sequences are useful to kind of understand really
what's going on.
NOTE CONF
But um, you know, after you've done enough of them,
they should be, should be kind of quite clear, I
NOTE CONF
hope, um, how to do that if you write it
out all in detail, it takes a lot of writing.
NOTE CONF
So, um, a little boring, but, um, getting the steps
is worthwhile.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so before I go into the recursive definitions, I
just want to, um.
NOTE CONF
Remind you about recursive definitions of lists and recursive definitions
of, of numbers, of natural numbers.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So as I said, you know, every list can be
NOTE CONF
using written using only this constructor or this, this function
cons and the empty list.
NOTE CONF
And we saw how that worked.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
There's that list written using those things.
And and here is this list of characters written using
NOTE CONF
those things.
And that came from the recursive definition of what a
NOTE CONF
list is.
And as I said, a list is either, you know,
NOTE CONF
the empty list.
I said, I say null here, but it should be
NOTE CONF
nil.
Oh, sorry.
NOTE CONF
No, no it's either it's either null written like this,
which I pronounced nil, or it's a constructed list written
NOTE CONF
like that which has a head x and a tail
x.
NOTE CONF
That's what I meant to say.
Okay, okay.
NOTE CONF
And then similarly, and I don't think I showed you
this last time or maybe, maybe I did, but I
NOTE CONF
don't think so.
Um, we can define natural numbers recursively, um, by saying
NOTE CONF
how you can build them.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So a natural number.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Natural number.
That's the terminology in mathematics for numbers 0123 and so
NOTE CONF
on.
So no negative numbers.
NOTE CONF
Just the just the ones from zero onwards.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So a natural number is either zero or it's the
successor of a natural number.
NOTE CONF
Successor is a number plus one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we can take zero.
We can take zero plus one.
NOTE CONF
That's one.
We can take zero plus one plus one.
NOTE CONF
That's two zero plus one plus one plus one is
three and so forth.
NOTE CONF
All of the numbers we can get that way okay.
All generated by this recursive definition.
NOTE CONF
Recursive.
Because I'm defining a natural number and I'm using, uh,
NOTE CONF
what it is to be a natural number in the
definition.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
In Haskell, when I write recursive functions on lists, I
NOTE CONF
use exactly the definition, the recursive definition of lists.
I write cases which have, you know, patterns like like
NOTE CONF
nil and x cons x's as patterns for the cases.
Um, in Haskell, uh, we don't have patterns for, for
NOTE CONF
natural numbers, but we, we do something kind of similar,
um, like as, as seen in this definition here instead
NOTE CONF
of, instead of, uh, zero and uh, n plus one,
we use zero, and we and we are use subtraction
NOTE CONF
of one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, kind of same idea, but without having a
pattern.
NOTE CONF
So we have here for example zero.
And then we have another pattern I, which is it
NOTE CONF
has to be something plus one because it's not zero.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So here is here is code for select.
This is this function that indexes into a list and
NOTE CONF
picks out the thing that's in the position, um, that
you're asking for.
NOTE CONF
So um the ith position okay.
So okay.
NOTE CONF
You give it a list, you give an integer and
it gives you the thing in that position.
NOTE CONF
And there are two cases recursive definition, two cases, the
base case where you're looking for the thing in position
NOTE CONF
zero.
Remember we're indexing starting from position zero the first the
NOTE CONF
one at the beginning.
And so if you've got a list first of all,
NOTE CONF
if you've got a list that's just empty, you can't
select the thing in position, in any position, because there
NOTE CONF
isn't anything, right?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we don't have a case for that because there
isn't anything you can write for that case.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Haskell will, uh, will will give an error in that
NOTE CONF
case.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But if there is something in the list, then you
can index and try to find something in a certain
NOTE CONF
position.
And if it's if it's position zero and the list
NOTE CONF
is x cons x, then of course the answer is
is x.
NOTE CONF
It's the first thing in the list okay.
Position zero.
NOTE CONF
The first thing.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Is that clear.
That's the base case.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
If if uh if you're not looking for the thing
NOTE CONF
in positions zero, then you're looking for the thing in
some other positions.
NOTE CONF
So let's call it I.
So I is not equal to zero.
NOTE CONF
It's at least one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So the thing that you're looking for is not x
because x is in position zero.
NOTE CONF
It has to be something in XS.
Okay, so what we do is we we select from
NOTE CONF
X is not the thing in position I but the
thing in position I minus one okay.
NOTE CONF
We thrown away the first thing.
And so uh what we're looking for now is the
NOTE CONF
thing in X is at position I minus one.
So we subtract one from the index okay.
NOTE CONF
If we're looking at the thing in position one then
um then you know I would be one here and
NOTE CONF
we'd be looking for the thing in, in XS at
position zero.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Which would be the first thing.
NOTE CONF
It's kind of confusing talking about position zero.
And then it's the first thing, but that's.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, that's what it is.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Is that definition reasonably clear.
This is doing recursion simultaneously On a list.
NOTE CONF
The first argument is a list and on natural number,
which is the second argument.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so we've got, we've got um, a base case.
So we have a base case for uh, for the
NOTE CONF
natural number.
Uh, we could have a base case for the empty
NOTE CONF
list as well, but that's just going to produce an
error.
NOTE CONF
And so we let Haskell do that by itself.
We don't have to write it down.
NOTE CONF
Um, if you want it to be tidy, you might
write, um, you might write, you know, empty list.
NOTE CONF
Uh, select I is equal to, um, in Haskell, there's
a function called error.
NOTE CONF
Um, well, I'll do it on the laptop.
Function called error.
NOTE CONF
You can call, um.
Just a second.
NOTE CONF
Um, no.
Error.
NOTE CONF
Okay, first of all, what type does it have?
You can always, uh, you want to find out about
NOTE CONF
a function.
You can you can ask what type it is.
NOTE CONF
So there's, uh, that's how you do that.
So it takes a, a list of a list of
NOTE CONF
characters that is a string, and it produces, um, a,
which means it can produce anything, which means you can
NOTE CONF
put it in any context.
You can't see.
NOTE CONF
Oh, you can't see.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
I pushed the button, but it didn't work.
NOTE CONF
Okay, thanks.
You can ask for the type of a function, and
NOTE CONF
you get it.
The fact that this produces a value of type of
NOTE CONF
type A, meaning any type.
That's rather unusual.
NOTE CONF
Uh, what it means is you can put this in
any context.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And, um, uh, you can, um, supply it with an
NOTE CONF
error message and it will produce, um, it'll produce an
exception containing your error message.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I could have written, um, a third case here
NOTE CONF
with an error message if I wanted to.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That's how you would do it.
Anyway, there's a code.
NOTE CONF
Uh, could you take a minute or two and try
to write the code for, um, take and drop recursive
NOTE CONF
code for take and drop?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Could you please do that right now?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And they are not so much different from from these
here.
NOTE CONF
You're going to need three cases for for each of
them okay.
NOTE CONF
One for the case where the the number zero and
one for the case where you've got the empty list
NOTE CONF
and one for the case where, um, yeah, the other
case.
NOTE CONF
Introducing the world's first certified of.
Lessons from jeopardy!
NOTE CONF
If you know the.
Okay, uh, maybe you've managed to do that.
NOTE CONF
Or maybe you were distracted by me playing silly music,
but, um.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, uh.
Uh, here's here's the answer.
NOTE CONF
Or an answer.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So, um, the code for take.
You know, as I said, there are three cases for
NOTE CONF
each of these.
You've got the case where where where the number is
NOTE CONF
zero.
Uh, you've got the case where the list is empty,
NOTE CONF
and then you've got the case where the number is
non-zero and the list is non-empty.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The recursive case.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So um, so we want to take zero zero items
NOTE CONF
from a list XZ okay.
Obviously the result is the empty list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
If, um, if you want to take any number of
NOTE CONF
items from the empty list, well, there aren't any, so
you're out of luck, so you've got to return the
NOTE CONF
empty list.
You could return an error if you wanted.
NOTE CONF
But the way take is defined in Haskell, it'll give
you the empty list.
NOTE CONF
So if you ask for the first, you know, n
items of a list, that's that's shorter than that.
NOTE CONF
It'll it'll just give you what's in the list and
nothing more.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, but if you want the ith item from a
NOTE CONF
list x cons xs and I is greater than zero.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, so that means that the that the item
x, the first item has to be included because you're
NOTE CONF
taking the first I and um, and that includes x
here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So ex cons and then you want all of the
NOTE CONF
other ones.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
All of the remaining ones which are, that is to
say, the I minus one, uh, number of items from
NOTE CONF
the list XZ, which is the, uh, what you have
left when you remove X or when you ignore x.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we take, you know, take I of x cons
NOTE CONF
x is its x cons take I minus one of
x is okay.
NOTE CONF
Did did did some of you get that or something
similar to that okay.
NOTE CONF
It's some.
It's not too different from what's here I mean at
NOTE CONF
least the recursive the recursive case.
You know you're you're doing a similar sort of thing.
NOTE CONF
There's an I minus one here and you're, you're applying
it.
NOTE CONF
Um, you're applying the recursive call.
The recursive call is to I minus one and XZ,
NOTE CONF
which is the the tail of this of this list
and and the the drop case is the same except
NOTE CONF
that um, except your your returning the rest.
So if you drop zero from xz, the result is
NOTE CONF
XZ.
If you're dropping, um, some number other than zero from
NOTE CONF
the empty list, the result is the empty list.
And if you're dropping I from x axis, it's the
NOTE CONF
same as dropping I minus one from XZ.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So you drop the first one and then you drop
all of the I minus one other ones after that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So simultaneous recursion on uh the A number and a
NOTE CONF
list.
So we need two base cases except here where I
NOTE CONF
didn't write it down because it would just be an
error.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Any questions about that.
NOTE CONF
Is that a question.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
You have to be a little more assertive.
You don't need the first down function definition.
NOTE CONF
For what?
Zero access.
NOTE CONF
You don't need the first definition.
Ah, yes.
NOTE CONF
That's a good point.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Good.
Good point.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Uh, exactly.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
These, um, uh, actually, you don't need two here because
NOTE CONF
the second one.
Uh, wait a minute.
NOTE CONF
No, you do need it.
Wait a minute.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, you need it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So if the if the first argument you were saying
you don't need both of these, right?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You say we just need the first one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Well, um.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
If you only had the first case this would work,
NOTE CONF
provided you don't want this behaviour that you get in
Haskell that taking the first n items in the list,
NOTE CONF
which is of length less than n, gives you just
what's in the list and nothing more.
NOTE CONF
Okay, what you would get if you left out.
The second case is you.
NOTE CONF
You'd get an error on that case.
Okay, so, um.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
No, sorry.
NOTE CONF
I thought you were.
I thought you were pointing out correctly that something is
NOTE CONF
redundant, but it isn't.
It isn't redundant.
NOTE CONF
You'd get a different function that way.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Anybody else have a question?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Wait a second.
I can't.
NOTE CONF
I can't hear you.
Let me try throwing you a this red thing.
NOTE CONF
Do you always have to start from the beginning of
the list.
NOTE CONF
Or you always.
Have?
NOTE CONF
Sorry, I can't even do.
You have to start from the beginning of the list.
NOTE CONF
If you're taking or dropping, do you have to start
from the beginning of the list, or can you start
NOTE CONF
like partway for it?
Do you have to start at the beginning of the
NOTE CONF
list?
Is that what you're asking?
NOTE CONF
You're always going, um, uh, let's see.
Left to right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Because because the list is built using cons and that's
NOTE CONF
and that is, um, always putting things on the left
at the beginning.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Sorry I didn't catch you at the beginning.
NOTE CONF
Anybody else want to try with the red cube?
No.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, I'll skip this.
NOTE CONF
This is just explaining pattern matching.
Um, again.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, this was explaining pattern matching in terms of conditionals.
Uh, I don't think I need to explain that.
NOTE CONF
Um, I let me see.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
You can.
There are different ways of writing these things.
NOTE CONF
So this is just showing that, um, uh, if you
wanted to make this a little bit clearer.
NOTE CONF
You might in the last case add a guard.
So this is a this is this is making explicit
NOTE CONF
in the last case here that it only applies if
I is greater than zero okay.
NOTE CONF
The code is otherwise the same okay.
You know it's going to be greater than zero because
NOTE CONF
you've already checked for the case where I is equal
to zero okay.
NOTE CONF
Because you do this in sequence.
But it is actually nicer to make that explicit by
NOTE CONF
putting it in the code.
So, um, you know, here we've got three cases that
NOTE CONF
are quite simple.
You could imagine in some much more complicated program.
NOTE CONF
It might be that by the time you've got to
this case, you've forgotten that it's, um, that you've already
NOTE CONF
checked this.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is just making it explicit.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So here is just showing how take works for a
particular example.
NOTE CONF
Um, so take three of words.
This string, this list words.
NOTE CONF
Um, so applying the third, the third case.
The third case, um, uh, several times we get w
NOTE CONF
and then O and then R, so we're where we're
going from three to 2 to 1.
NOTE CONF
We've got W O and R the first three um
items.
NOTE CONF
And then uh, and then at the end of that
we take, take zero of, of DZ the last, the
NOTE CONF
last bit.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And that applying the, the first case here gives us
the empty list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So there we produce from here the empty list.
NOTE CONF
And the result is w o and r okay.
Is that clear I hope right.
NOTE CONF
Um so I just want to now, uh, uh, spend
a little bit of time looking at what happens when
NOTE CONF
you take infinite lists.
Okay, so I said, in Haskell, you can compute with
NOTE CONF
infinite lists.
And that's and that's true.
NOTE CONF
You get you get results.
Um, uh, for, um, for programs on infinite lists, I
NOTE CONF
showed you the infinite list of prime numbers.
I mean, that was maybe I showed you the computing
NOTE CONF
forever, which is what you expect for something that's infinite.
Um, if I'd if I'd written a little, um, I
NOTE CONF
could have applied a function to it that took the
nth number in a list.
NOTE CONF
And then you could ask something like, what's the 374th
prime number?
NOTE CONF
And it would just compute that many prime numbers and
then give you the 374th one would be more, um,
NOTE CONF
a more kind of, uh, appropriate way of demonstrating that.
But the point is, you can compute with these infinite
NOTE CONF
lists and then and then produce finite, uh, results from
them.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You have to take some care doing this.
NOTE CONF
And here's an example of of not taking enough care.
I've explained how, um, how I'm going to show you
NOTE CONF
this actually working.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
I've, uh, I've explained how you can define take, um,
in two ways.
NOTE CONF
There we go.
Up there, the the with a comprehension first and with
NOTE CONF
no sorry recursion first, comprehension second.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But, um, they actually produce so they produce the same
answers for finite lists, but for infinite lists, the, um
NOTE CONF
the result is different.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It's on the slide, but I'll just show it to
you in actual, uh, actually running.
NOTE CONF
So you believe me.
So if I do, um, take take of, um, what
NOTE CONF
was the example there?
Three Of the list.
NOTE CONF
From ten on up.
I'll get, as I would expect, um, lists containing ten,
NOTE CONF
11 and 12.
So that's the first three things in this list.
NOTE CONF
Okay, but if I do take comp of three, um,
ten on up, what I'll get is, um, I'll get
NOTE CONF
Haskell telling me that the, the list that I want
contains ten, 11 and 12, and then it it doesn't
NOTE CONF
end the computation.
Uh, here we are.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
The computation hasn't ended yet.
NOTE CONF
It's still looking.
It's still looking for some other item that might be
NOTE CONF
in that list.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Why is that?
I have to interrupt it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Why is that?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, it's because of the code here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
If you look at this code, you, um, you know,
NOTE CONF
you take.
Maybe I have this on a slide.
NOTE CONF
Let me see.
Um.
NOTE CONF
This is too complicated.
I'm not going to go into this.
NOTE CONF
But if you look at the recursive one, if you
look at the recursive one, it's, uh, it's counting down,
NOTE CONF
and then eventually it gets to zero.
Um, and the answer is the empty list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But the, um.
NOTE CONF
Oh, sorry.
This is the one I wanted to show you.
NOTE CONF
This is this is also not very helpful.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Well.
NOTE CONF
Let me do this on paper.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so what have we got here?
We've got the code up.
NOTE CONF
Let me show you the.
Code.
NOTE CONF
There.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Take comp.
So, what's going on here?
NOTE CONF
We're going through the items in zip.
0...
NOTE CONF
And, uh, and x is so X is in this
case is um, is ten, 1112.
NOTE CONF
Actually, wait a minute.
Excuse me.
NOTE CONF
Um.
It's ten.
NOTE CONF
It's.
Yeah, ten.
NOTE CONF
It's ten.
11.
NOTE CONF
12 going on forever.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So what do I get from that?
I get zero ten.
NOTE CONF
It's a list.
Zero ten.
NOTE CONF
111.
Two.
NOTE CONF
12.
Three.
NOTE CONF
13.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Going on forever.
And so looking at the code.
NOTE CONF
So this is what's computed by by this bit.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And it's looking for a cases where the first thing
in the pair is less than I, I in this
NOTE CONF
case is um three.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it looks at this, it says yes zero is
less than three.
NOTE CONF
Uh, part of the answer should be ten.
Next item.
NOTE CONF
Yes one is less than three.
So the next bit of the answer is 11.
NOTE CONF
Uh okay.
Here two is less than three.
NOTE CONF
The third item should be 12.
And then it looks at this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, well, no, three is not less than three.
NOTE CONF
Don't include that one looks at that one.
Four is not less than three.
NOTE CONF
Don't include that one.
It keeps on going.
NOTE CONF
Looking faithfully.
Uh, one after the other.
NOTE CONF
For an item where the first thing in the in
the pair is less than three, it will of course,
NOTE CONF
never find one.
Okay?
NOTE CONF
Because the the indices are increasing, but Haskell doesn't know
that.
NOTE CONF
So it'll keep looking.
Never finding anything.
NOTE CONF
And so that's why after you know, producing ten 1112,
it'll just sit there and and not and not stop
NOTE CONF
okay.
It's just looking forever.
NOTE CONF
So this is an example of how you have to
be a little careful with infinite lists and, um, you
NOTE CONF
know, lazy computation works.
Um, depending on how you mean.
NOTE CONF
Depending on how you you use it, it'll it'll work
and give you answers that you want.
NOTE CONF
And sometimes you have to be careful.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Where am I?
Here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Have a few more minutes.
NOTE CONF
I just want to, um, talk to you a little
bit more about arithmetic, because the way that the recursive
NOTE CONF
definition of natural numbers is, um, is given, uh, the
way that you can write functions on natural numbers.
NOTE CONF
This is, um, from mathematics, uh, about 130, 140 years
ago.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's something called piano arithmetic.
Piano is spelled piano, which is not like the thing
NOTE CONF
that you play with 88 keys.
Um, um, musical instrument.
NOTE CONF
It's, um, the man, uh, Giuseppe.
Piano.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And he was the first one to, um, to write
NOTE CONF
this down and to understand how induction works.
Um, mathematical induction.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so here is, uh, piano arithmetic used.
NOTE CONF
Suppose you had that you, that you didn't have addition
multiplication and uh, exponentiation.
NOTE CONF
So here is how you could define these three things
okay.
NOTE CONF
On on natural numbers okay.
Numbers zero and greater.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So plus uh it takes two integers, produces an integer
NOTE CONF
and is defined by recursion.
So m number m plus zero.
NOTE CONF
It's recursion on the second argument okay m plus zero
is m and n plus n for m greater than
NOTE CONF
zero.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Well uh that's recursively you look at m plus n
minus one whatever that is.
NOTE CONF
And then you add one to it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So for example three plus two is three plus one
plus one.
NOTE CONF
You know.
You know four plus 72 is four plus 71 plus
NOTE CONF
one okay.
And so forth.
NOTE CONF
So this is a recursive definition of plus if you
didn't have plus if all you had that is to
NOTE CONF
say if all you had was plus one, you didn't
have anything except plus one and zero.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The plus here is not actually a recursive invocation of
NOTE CONF
this.
Plus it's a it's a separate, separate operation.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um bit confusing okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's look at times.
So so how would you define times recursively.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Well as m times zero is zero okay.
NOTE CONF
And any things times zero is zero.
All right.
NOTE CONF
And m times n it's like uh, n copies of
em added together.
NOTE CONF
So em plus em, plus em plus m n times
added together.
NOTE CONF
And this is what this is doing here.
You take, um, to get em copies of N, you
NOTE CONF
get n minus one copies of em, and then you
put another copy of em onto it, and you add
NOTE CONF
them all together.
That's what's happening here.
NOTE CONF
All right.
And similarly for exponentiation.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
M to the power of zero is one m.
NOTE CONF
Anything to the power of zero is one and m
to the power of n.
NOTE CONF
It's like you take n copies of em and you
multiply them together.
NOTE CONF
So similar pattern is what we had here just now.
Except we're using multiplication to put together the the the
NOTE CONF
things.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So m times, m times m times m etc. however
many you need.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And, um, just showing that working.
NOTE CONF
This is, this is two plus three computation sequence.
Um, you know, you eventually work your way down to
NOTE CONF
two plus zero, and then you add one a bunch
of times to get five.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's just a kind of perhaps curiosity for those
NOTE CONF
of you who are doing maybe computer science and mathematics,
this is something you might learn about in mathematics is
NOTE CONF
kind of the foundations of mathematics include like how do
you define what the numbers are?
NOTE CONF
Um, and here's a picture of Giuseppe Piano.
Um, and, uh, slightly funny looking man.
NOTE CONF
Uh, but anyway, he invented piano arithmetic.
Um, and, um.
NOTE CONF
That's that's all I wanted to say, but I want
to give you some time to ask questions.
NOTE CONF
So are there any questions at this point?
Um, before I finish the lecture.
NOTE CONF
Any hands or maybe you've got you've had enough of
recursion and you just want to go away.
NOTE CONF
Uh, perhaps.
Okay, you can come up afterwards and ask.
NOTE CONF
So next time, thank you for your attention.
Next time we're going to have higher order functions okay.
NOTE CONF
Next lecture.
So thank you.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
And uh last.
NOTE CONF
Slide you define slide matrix for.
For some uh, wait a minute.
NOTE CONF
Uh, you mean wait a minute.
Let me just get to it.
NOTE CONF
That one.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
I was trying to explain.
This is kind of a this is kind of a,
NOTE CONF
uh, unfortunate way that I wrote this down.
The way this was done in mathematics is actually you
NOTE CONF
define, um, you don't use zero and plus one, you
use zero, and you use a function called sometimes succ
NOTE CONF
for successor or s for successor.
Um, and it's applied to a, you know, a number.
NOTE CONF
And so and so instead of writing, instead of writing
zero plus one plus one plus one, I would write
NOTE CONF
successor of successor of successor of zero.
And instead of writing this I would write m uh
NOTE CONF
plus zero equals m and m plus successor uh, of
n equals um m plus n.
NOTE CONF
I would write successor of that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's really what I'm trying to do.
When I write that.
NOTE CONF
Um.